## Getting started with Linux

There are many ways to get started with using Linux. We will be discussing three options here:

First way is to install Linux directly on your host computer. This allows for the operating system software to interact directly with hardware, and allows for full control over the OS on your host. Downside to this approach is that it is more technically inclined, and can be a bit overkill for people who want to do simple things with Linux.

Second way is to install Linux in a virtual machine on your host computer. We will learn more about virtualization in a later module, but for purposes of this module it is basically a software level computer, or an OS running in an application. Virtual Machines allow for isolation from the host machine in a variety of ways. It is much simpler then installing Linux directly on a physical host, but they can in some cases be less efficient to run then directly on the host. So it all depends on the use case of your needs.

The third way, and the way we will use for this module, is to basically "rent" a Linux machine. Cloud companies such as AWS, Google Cloud Platform, and Azure have ways for people to borrow compute from their infrastructure. Luckily, AWS has a free tier which we can get started with [here](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/pricing/#:~:text=As%20part%20of%20the%20AWS,use%20only%20EC2%20Micro%20instances.). Renting a machine is perfect for learning since we just want to learn the basics of Linux, but obviously if you have more hefty demands in regards to how you want to use your machine, this may not be the best option. The reason being the free tier is obviously limited.